okay good morning everyone Let's uh get
started I don't have any updates about
the final projects any questions
about details of physics engines I can
help
with nope okay all right so we are going
to finish our discussion today about
Collective robotics how do we go about
automatically designing autonomous
machines that coordinate their action
or if implicit signaling and
coordination is not sufficient are able
to communicate amongst themselves
explicitly if it's useful so we're going
to see today in lecture 21 the evolution
of
communication okay couple of new items
in this experiment which I introduced
last time this is the first time that
we've seen uh we've seen gendered agents
we have a total of 1600 agents that are
operating on a toroid like before in
this case we're going to be operating
with a discrete grid so the male and
female agents can move from one grid one
point to the
other there are going to be different
sensor motor capabilities for the two
groups the quote unquote females are
going to be deaf and immobile they do
not move but they can emit signals into
their
environment males are blind they cannot
see but they can
hear they cannot signal and they are
mobile seems like a whole bunch of
arbitrary choices this particular
experiment it was uh the investigators
were investigating a bioinspired
approach to evolutionary robotic so
they're incorporating various aspects
from different species and they're
setting up a situation as we'll see in a
moment in which communication may or may
not
evolve
okay something that is familiar for all
of these 1600 agents each one is going
to be equipped with a neural network
controller the cognitive architecture of
the neural network controllers for the
males is identical to the cognitive
architecture for the neural network
controller of the females in all cases
every agent has three layers in its
neural network a layer of sensor neurons
a layer of hidden neurons and a layer of
motor neurons we have synaptic
connections between input to hidden
hidden to hidden hidden to Hidden and
hidden to Output same thing down here
the moment we see a hidden layer in
recurrent connections what does that
tell
us memory if it's
useful
okay okay the sensor neurons and the
motor neurons are going to play
different roles in the females and males
because they have complementary and
different sensor motor abilities let's
have a look at the female Network which
is up here I apologize for the small
font it might be difficult to read back
here at every time step of the
simulations we're going to see in a
moment the values that are applied to
the input layer of the female's neural
network is the position and orientation
of the closest male in her visual field
the females can
see this is their visual field wherever
a female is she can see up to two units
to her west east north and south so if a
male enters her visual range the posi
the relative position of that male
male uh the relative position and
orientation of that male will be fed
into the input layer of the female's
neural networks she can
see in this example here for this
particular female there is a male that
is to her Southeast and that male is
facing south that information is fed
into the input layer up here those
directions uh the POS relative positions
and headings are binarized we don't need
to worry about the details about
how so like your like your robot with
binary touch sensors this neural network
is also receiving binary values that are
dictated by what the males are doing in
her visual
range in the case of this particular
female here there are two males within
her visual range the relative position
and heading of the closest male is
what's supplied to this female's uh
input layer of her neural network
controller so far so good okay at each
time step of the simulation then we then
propagate those input values through the
neural network in the way that we've
seen many times before and the values
arriving at the output layer for the
female are translated into her mating
call the females uh are immobile but
they can see and they signal so they do
not move but they emit mating call which
is a binary Vector so there's an
activation function sitting inside of
these motor neurons which bizes these
values so the mating call of all the
females we're going to see in this study
is simply a binary
Vector
okay the male Network which again has
the ident identical cognitive
architecture the input layer of the male
network is the mating call of the
closest female to that male if the male
is within her range so for example in
the case of this particular male here
this male is actually in uh is in
hearing distance of two females this
male uh in the in this particular
experiment they would flip a coin and
this male would either hear this female
or this female let's assume we flip a
coin in its heads so whatever the output
Ma call is of this female that binary
Vector is copied into the input layer of
that male's neural network
controller males can
hear so far so good
okay uh and if the if a male is outside
of any female's uh visual range like
this male and this male the input to the
neural network controller for this male
is all zeros same for this male so far
so
good question what was the purpose of
making
of what what is the purpose again it
seems like an arbitrary choice there's a
lot of uh there's a lot of biologically
inspired terminology here daam mobile
signaling mating
call where do you think this is all
going it's okay if you're not sure yet
the actual
signal the the title for this study is
the evolution of
communication let let me finish the
output layer of the male Network and a
couple pieces might start to fall into
place the male hears if it's within
hearing distance of a female hears a
mating
call as always we propagate the values
the input values arriving at the input
layer for the male neural network
controller we propagate it from the
input layer to the hidden layer and then
from the hidden layer down to the output
layer and the output layer for the male
contains four neurons and again I
apologize for the small font but you can
see down here they are not binarizing
the output layer they're just leaving
the raw values that arrive at these
output neurons the raw weighted sum
there are four motor neurons for the
males and those four motor neurons are
are associated with the four actions
that the males can perform or motor
Primitives which we've heard of before
males can either stay still they can
move one unit forward in the direction
they're facing or they can turn 90 de to
their left or they can turn 90 de to
their right in this cartoon example down
here I don't know why they didn't just
draw the fourth motor neuron we've got a
value
of-4 in the first neuron 22 in the
second neuron and 78 in the fourth
neuron we look at those four those four
values and we determine which is the
larger in this case it's 78 so the
fourth motor neuron has the highest
magnitude value that fourth motor neuron
is associated with the fourth action so
this particular male at the next time
step will turn 90 to its
right if we took the same male with
exactly the same set of synaptic weights
and that male heard a different binary
Vector in its input layer you might get
a different distribution of values at
the output layer and perhaps now the
second neuron would have the highest
magnitude value and that second motor
neuron is associated with the second
action which would be move forward
so
males here and are mobile they also
don't signal all they do is act okay and
he guesses about where all this is going
now we've seen some parts of this
experiment so far some are familiar
we've got a whole bunch of Agents
they're all being controlled by a neural
network we update that neural network at
every time step so the females sense
think and act the males sense think and
act what's the missing piece or pieces
we haven't introduced
yet we don't have a fitness function we
don't have a fitness function yet any
guesses about what the fitness function
might be given all the loaded
terminology sorry is it just that
the is it that assumtion is a
male that's exactly what it is in all of
the evolutionary algorithms and
evolutionary robotics experiments we've
seen in this course so far reproduction
is kind of glossed over we have a
population of vectors or trees like we
saw last time with our virtual Lions we
got a whole population of things we have
a fitness function that assigns values
to all of those uh to all of those
things we delete the ones with low
values we make randomly modified C
copies of the survivors with higher
values and sometimes we combine genetic
material from the survivors when we
randomly modify that genetic
material it drives biologists up the
wall whenever they hear an evolutionary
algorithm there are many many of those
details that are obviously have no
counterpart in
reality as far as we know we are not uh
trying to satisfy a fitness function we
propagate our genetic material based on
mating and producing Offspring so in
this evolutionary uh robotics experiment
we're going to see today it's an older
experiment it's from 91 but arguably
it's more biologically realistic than
any other study you're going to we're
going to see in this course and pretty
much in anything that's been published
since they put quite a bit of effort
into this study to making the
evolutionary part as biologically
realistic as
possible make
sense okay so the there is actually no
Fitness function really there is a
population we've got 800 females and 800
males males that find females th those
male female pairs are going to produce
more
offspring than males and females that do
not find each other so what do you
think's going to happen to the males and
females that do not find each
other they're going to die off and over
evolutionary time what do you think
generally is going to
happen males and females that are able
to find each other produce offspring
that find can find each other they're
going to inherit that ability to find
members of the opposite sex that's it
there's no Locomotion No Object
manipulation in this study
whatsoever if you're a male and uh there
is evolutionary pressure acting on you
to find uh female mates and if you're a
female and there is evolutionary
pressure acting on you to attract mates
to you with mating
calls what is a generally good strategy
for the females and males over
evolutionary time
to have meaningful mating calls a random
female neural network when supplied with
information about nearby males will emit
a random binary Vector strictly speaking
that binary Vector has no meaning yet
it's randomly generated by a random
neural network a neural network with
random synaptic weights you take that uh
semantic free that that binary Vector
that has no meaning associated with it
and you plug it into a male neural
network which also has random synaptic
weights the male is going to move at
random what is the meaning of that
meeting call there's no
meaning yet right okay so that's where
we're going to start with we're going to
distribute 800 males and 800 females at
random on our
toroid the females are going to start
emitting random signals and males are
going to hear those signals shouldn't
even call them signals going to start
emitting sound the males are going to
hear those sounds and they're going to
do something at random we're starting
with no language no meaning no
communication whatsoever the question
that these investigators asked was was
will the will communication evolve yes
or no in this very simple study and if
it does evolve what does that
communication look
like okay again since we're talking
about this study you can probably guess
that the answer to the first question
will language or will communication of
all the answer is yes okay so let's have
a look okay uh so mating itself let's
talk about that we sort of already
figured this out so if a male as it's
moving about on this discret grid
turning left moving one unit forward
turning right turning right turning
right moving forward staying still and
so on if a male ever moves into the same
uh cell as a female we take each male
and female parent we make a modified
copy of each of them there's no sexual
recombination here so this this is kind
of a strange thing lots of biological
detail in this study except kind of the
whole point of mating which is to
combine genetic material in this case we
take the male parent the female parent
we make randomly modified copies of
their controllers so now we have a male
offspring the son and we have a male a
female Offspring the
daughter the male and the daughter
overwrite some other male and female
Elsewhere on the toroid at random so
some other male is chosen that male is
deleted and the position of that that
recently vacated cell the Sun the male
offspring is copied into that cell and a
random female is chosen she is deleted
and the daughter is placed into that
recently vacated
cell we then take the male uh we take
the male parent and the female parent
out of the cell that they're co-occupy
in and place them at random locations on
the toroid into random empty cells
that's a mating event pretty
straightforward so far so good so that's
it there's no Fitness
function let's see what happens okay A
Very Old study so we're going to have to
look at tables today not the most
interesting thing to look at we're going
to learn how to read these tables
in this first study they restricted the
width of the output layer for the female
Network to just three neurons and they
restricted the width of the input layer
for the male Network to three
neurons that means that any female could
admit any one of eight quote unquote
mating calls she can sing the song 0000
or sing the song 001
010 and so on make sense okay so they
put 1600 agents at random on the toroid
and then they just started to update the
simulation at every time step of the
simulation they evaluated all 1600
neural network controllers and the
result of those 1600 evaluations was
that a female emitted one of these eight
songs at random these are random neural
networks and males tended to do things
at
random they updated the simulation again
second time step evaluated all
1600 uh all 1600 neural networks again
and again and again and again during any
one of those time simulation time steps
if a male and female entered the same
cell they reproduced and they just ran
the simulation forever there's no
Generations in this uh experiment we're
not starting the simulation over again
and rerunning the simulation it's just
one long simulation in which Evolution
proceeds quite different from what we've
seen so far make sense okay so this
snapshot is the state of the world after
100 time steps of the simulation during
those 100 time steps they look to across
all 800 females and you can imagine on
on average those 800 females over those
100 time steps tended to emit these
eight songs with equal probability right
there's no reason why one female would
admit would emit one the females would
emit one song more than the
other every time they did every time a
female emitted a song and there was a
male nearby they looked to see what the
male did in response resp to hearing
that song and they looked at that across
all 800 males over the 100 time steps
what happened in all the cases in which
a male heard the song
0000 what did the males do on
average turn
right turn right uh 38 uh 38 times move
forward they moved forward 25 times
turned left nine out of times Stood
Still 28
times during the same time period the
same 800 males uh 19 of them moved
forward when they heard this 25 of them
turned right when they heard this and so
on what are the males doing on average
in response to the females during these
first 100 time steps on the toroid
is it what you
expect yes
why they're moving randomly right
they're they're controlled by random
neural networks pretty much a quarter of
the time males do one of their four
actions that's it right so this is a
sanity check this is what you would
expect from all the descriptions we've
given of the experiment so far no
evolution of mating no evolution of
communication no nothing yet this is the
starting
point this is after 5,000 time steps of
the same simulation what's
changed something's starting to happen
they almost never stand still they
almost never stand still why not they
meaning the males males never stand
still they have evolved to not stand
still anymore
standing
still absolutely as a male you can be
guaranteed that if you stay in the same
cell you're not going to find a female
females do not move they do not teleport
if you want a mate you got to
move what else is
happening looks like they spend most of
the time just kind of moving in a
straight line so they only turn like a
couple times to sort of rout themselves
most of the time they're moving forward
as a male turning 90 to the left or 90
to the right you're also guaranteed not
to find a female for better for worse
there's lot of lot of metaphors to human
males and females in this I will not
crack any jokes in this lecture here you
can draw your own conclusions for the
males at this point they have evolved to
go forward not stay still not turn left
not turn right
that's the best thing for the males to
do under these conditions what do we
mean by these
conditions is this the best possible
thing for the males to
do we're only talking about the male so
far this doesn't this table doesn't tell
us anything about any Evolution that's
occurred among the female population has
anything occurred among the female
population do you think at this point in
evolutionary
time I see a couple of nods and a couple
of shakes of the head so a little bit of
disagreement thoughts um there's
slightly different distribution for
turning right and turning left implying
that the signals have some bearing on
whether they turn right or turn left
maybe maybe if you look across these
three columns the distributions are not
identical now that could just be noise
in the data right this is still still
very early on in EV in The evolutionary
history of this pidal world as we see as
we'll see in a moment we're still in
primordial times here so maybe it's just
noise maybe the females have not evolved
to signal yet but there are some
differences so maybe certain songs are
starting to influence male Behavior
maybe so far so
good here's
7500 time steps into the evolutionary
history of this planet what's
happening if the females were starting
to evolve signaling it's lost on these
particular 8,000
males they are clearly now ignoring any
difference if there is any in the
distribution of signals emitted by the
females go straight I I know I know one
of these investigators but I never got
around to ask him I would imagine when
they saw this data they were probably
pretty depressed this does not look like
the kind of place in which the evolution
of communication is going to occur looks
like a failure to
me
15,000 time steps later so we've jumped
further into the future
what's
happened asso certain signals with
turning left or right they've learned to
associate certain signals with turning
left or
right almost perfect no learning going
on just a reminder that learning means
that during the lifetime of an
individual its synaptic weights are
changing this is evolution so throughout
the lifetime of a male or female however
long they live on this grid their
synaptic weights never change so they're
evolving the males are evolving to to uh
selectively do certain actions when they
hear certain
songs again these these tables are only
reporting statistics about the males it
doesn't say anything about the
statistics of what the females are doing
can you guess what do you think the
females are doing on average
if you were to look around this time
across all 800 females for a 100 a
thousand time steps do you think the
distribution of these songs would be
uniform probably not why
not most of the time the FES are
probably go straight until they're like
in alignment with uh the females might
want them to to move straight we we'll
put mentally put scare quotes on
everything as we go but generally
speaking probably yes there is obviously
an evolutionary benefit for the males
presumably to per to turn right when
they hear one1 and to turn left when
they hear one0 that seems to be an
evolutionary benefit for the males so
there must also be some evolutionary
benefit for the females as well which
is for all we know it's for the females
to emit one1 under certain conditions
there must be certain conditions of the
male uh of males relative to the females
in which females telling the males to
turn right makes sense in the sense of
it will bring the male to the female and
from the female's perspective there are
also situations
in which it makes sense for her to emit
the song
one there are conditions under which she
quote unquote knows to emit one
one0 and she quote unquote knows that
will cause the male to turn left and
that that will likely lead to a
reproduction
event okay what conditions are these
good observation here's an example of at
this point
uh in evolutionary time what's going on
so just to summarize what we've just
seen at the very beginning as we would
expect males wander at random and
females signal at random we should
probably just say emit sound signal
implies that there's some meaning to the
sound at this point there is no meaning
associated with these eight binary
vectors males that stood still or turned
left or turned right and stayed in place
tended to go extinct
and were out competed and out evolved by
males that evolve to move in straight
lines and ignore any potential
signals however after a a significant
period of time the evolution of
communication started to occur males
started to evolve to turn when they were
on the same row or column as the female
so here's our female sitting down here
and they've shaded in same row same
column for the feale female they noted
the investigators noted at around this
particular time when a male moved into a
female's territory and came into contact
with any of these shaded cells whenever
a male uh entered the same colum or the
same row as a
female she tended to emit one of these
two signals much more often than she
would otherwise remember that the
females can see they know where the male
is relative to themselves and
orientation okay uh that started to
happen for some of these shaded cells
and then over evolutionary time around
this time females started to emit those
signals more often for more and more of
these shaded uh shaded
cells is this the best that the males
and females can do do you think
what's the optimal strategy
here it's a very simple experiment not a
lot going on
here but it turns out that there is the
potential for some relatively
sophisticated uh Collective Dynamics
here
okay think about it we'll come back to
it okay let's just pause for a moment
and have a look at some actual data
again I apologize for the quality of
these Graphics here uh what we just
looked at is the test experiment this is
their algorithm a and we're going to
look at a control their algorithm B you
can think of this as AB testing again so
again I apologize this is going to be
hard to hard to read
here test is this particular curve
here and in test here the horizontal
axis is evolutionary time usually in all
these experiments in this course we've
looked at so far evolutionary time on
the horizontal axis is measured in the
number of generations the number of
times we update the state of all the
individuals in the population in this
experiment remember there's just one
long simulation measured in time steps
so they ran this single simulation for
60,000 time steps and on the vertical
axis they measured on the vertical axis
they measured for all 800 males the
average time between reproduction events
so at the beginning way back at the
beginning here males found females on
average after about
270 time steps by the the end males were
finding females on an average of 40 time
steps clearly the evolution of
coordination between males and females
has increased in this
study in the control experiment shown
here algorithm variant B they me they
made one change and one change only
which is that the males were deafened
when they copied the binary uh when they
copied the binary Vector from the output
layer of a female neural network
controller into the input layer of a
male neural controller they permuted the
binary
values so basically the male could hear
but it was garbled what the male was
hearing which means of course that what
the male did was also garbled not
surprisingly by the end of
evolution the these males that cannot
hear very well it takes them longer to
find
females the difference between these two
curves is proof that the males and
females have evolved communication the
females have evolved the ability to
quote unquote know when to emit what
signal and the males have evolved the
ability to know what to do when they
hear what signal that obviously cannot
happen in the control study because the
males can't
hear makes sense seems pretty clear
what's going on
here during this period the deafened
males are actually doing
better how is this
possible how do we explain
this it's not noise it's real if they
rerun this experiment over and over
again with males that can hear and males
that are deafened during the early days
of Evolution tion the deafened males
tend to mate more often with
females they can still evolve to not
stand still which they do like the males
did that could hear the males that could
hear also evolved to not stand
still but there seems to be an actual
Advantage for the deafened males early
on it like At first um hearing actually
provides noise that stops
like like the randomness is detrimental
at first until the hearing evolves be
effective the randomness if it's
detrimental then this curve would be
above this curve these males are hearing
garbled
information but they do better at least
for a little while what's going
on is it like the idea that like before
you can succeed you have to fail like
it's like they're trying to be going for
but they like don't know exactly to do
yet we're you're on the right track
right there's something that's going on
they obviously the the males that can
hear are failing before they s succeed
and actually the same for the
females true but again that's also true
in the original experiment the females
are are starting to evolve the ability
to
we got to try and explain why the de and
males have an
advantage because
only best they can do is to move
constantly in a straight and it's a lot
easier to do that if do that for
everything than if you have a bunch of
different signals that you have tool
specific behaviors absolutely right so
this is a an important reminder that
communication which our species is very
good at and clearly has utility it's
useful there's no free lunch everything
comes at a cost communication and
language is very costly from an
evolutionary point of view what do we
mean by cost what what is the cost of
communication it takes a really long
time to get it right it takes a really
long time to get it right why why does
it take so long to evolve communication
is not a trivial thing we are not the
only species that's capable of language
but there are few species on this planet
that are and arguably one of we're one
of the better ones at it it's not easy
not easy in the sense that there's a
cost it takes Evolution a very long time
why what specifically is so difficult
about language there's kind of like two
moving pieces two things communicating
and then trying to make those
Communications uniform across like all
of the different members of the
population so that any member from like
the females M calls can be interpreted
by like any member
absolutely right you said it perfectly
right at the beginning right there's two
pieces of the puzzle in any
communicating species the emitters have
to evolve to consistently emit signals
under under certain conditions and the
receivers have to evolve the ability to
interpret those signals appropriately
Evolution has to get both pieces in
place simultaneously a little bit of
both pieces in place simultaneously and
then ution can improve on it from there
but you got to get both pieces at once
any as any aspect of phenotype any
feature any behavior that requires
getting more than one thing right at
once is obviously very difficult for
evolution to do because
mutations have to improve both things
simultaneously most mutations as we've
seen and you probably seen firsthand in
your uh assignments mutations tend to
break things right and if you're trying
to establish or improve two things at
once the probability of a mutation doing
that is exceedingly low it's very very
low so just to concretize this idea
let's go back to this specific case of
one female who has started to evolve the
ability to emit a signal that causes
males to turn
left when any male comes into contact
with any of these shaded cells
otherwise assume that that female emits
the signal that means just go straight
so imagine this female is actually
alternating between just two different
songs either go left or go
straight what should the males do under
those
conditions they should listen and obey
go straight and when you get to one of
these cells turn left a male coming into
this female's territory from her
Northeast traveling west a male coming
in this way touches this cell the female
emits the signal turn left let's assume
the male obeys and does turn left what
does the female say next or sing
next what should she sing
next go
straight great made
event imagine another male same
situation comes in from her Northeast
traveling west hits this cell she says
go left and the male turns right the
female probably says you're other right
your other left right there's no
guarantee and actually it's quite likely
among 800 males that those males are
going to interpret those signals
differently right so for this female to
produce enough female offspring that
emit the right signals under the right
conditions there has to be she has to
attract enough males to make that
convention that beginning of language
start to propagate through the
population it's got to take a it's going
to take a large number of rare events
for those kinds of things to happen make
sense this is yet another example of
thinking about thinking is leing
language feels so easy to us I'm talking
I see some of you writing even if you're
not writing I assume you're interpreting
and understanding what I'm saying
language is effortless for us it is very
difficult for the individual it takes uh
human children a very long time to
master language and there are relatively
few species on this planet capable of
language It Is by no means an easy feat
is it is it easier more difficult to
evolve like the emitter receiver sort of
structure versus one where both parties
can Adit and receive great question so
in this case receivers are only
receivers they're not emitters and vice
versa that's a great question I don't
think anybody's tackled that you could
take this codebase as a starting point
and add some additional output neurons
to the males so that they can also sing
and you could add some additional MO
neurons to the females neural networks
to allow them to move and see what
happens great great idea hasn't been
done yet
okay that conventions will
conventions CH we saw one
of
ass yes are
those great question so conventions
right so in this world at this
particular
time it seems that 101 means turn right
and 110 means turn
left is that a historical accident did
that just happen based
on mutations in the history of
this
population or is it not a
convention is there something uh is
there something specific about
one1 if we were to re re Rewind The
evolutionary tape for this experiment
and go back to 16,000 random controllers
and run it Forward
again do you think you would always see
one Z1
evolving to mean turn
right of course not why would you if we
rewound our evolutionary type and and
ran it Forward again and re and we as a
species rediscovered the concept of
historical accident would we always
spell it h i s or would we spell it or
would we spell it of course not language
is always a the the specific symbols
that make up language are probably the
best example of historical contingency
in evolution or are the development of
culture completely arbitrary so in this
case where like the only instruction
that are really important is either turn
left or turn right would this not have
evolved quicker if the binary Vector was
only like two digits long to the okay
great so the investigators made some
decisions here like uh they uh set by
setting the number of possible signals
the females emitted it took in this case
15,000 time steps for communication to
start to evolve your question was what
would happen if we reran The
evolutionary tape but now females could
only emit four possible songs only two
motor neurons for the female and only
two sensor neurons for the males would
evolution of communication evolve
earlier later or not at
all it's a great question we're actually
going to see they did a second
experiment in which they did exactly
this they restricted the songs that the
females could sing we'll see in a moment
what happens but before we see what
happens what do you think
happens we're restricting if we restrict
the number of songs that the females can
sing and that males can hear we're
restricting the communication Channel
there's only four possible things that
the emitters can say to the receivers or
send to the
receivers what about if we widened this
the communication Channel what if what
if it were what if we uh expanded the
output female output and male input
layer to four neurons there's now two to
the four possible songs that females can
emit will communication evolve earlier
later not at all
thoughts it's not so obvious I don't
think feel like intuitively like you you
be kind of teally losing information if
you sniff that signal but on the same
hand it seems like a of comor problem
like the more potential signals there
are the harder it be to like pick up
actual signals intool that great great
point right you said losing information
right we haven't talked too much about
information in the Shannon sense in this
class yet information meaning what is
the number of possible things that can
in theory be communicated in this case
there are eight possible things that can
be
communicated clearly that was enough for
uh for Behavior to evolve here given
this distribution what are the fewest
number of songs do you think females
should have access to in order to evolve
communication I see a lot of people
holding up three right turn left turn
right go
forward could we get away with two why
two
yes uh true good point right so the mes
instinctually at this point and this is
not historical accident if you rewind
the evolutionary tape and run it again
the males generally will evolve to move
forward right there is a strong
Universal reason for them to all other
things being equal move forward you've
got it almost right there's this one
Quirk of the experiment which is that
when a male enters a female territory
the males can't help but hear whatever
she's singing so even
z0000 is going to influence what the
males do so there is implicit selection
pressure for the females to emit a
signal that the males interpret as go
forward right the males can't close
their ears and just go forward so the
female has one of the one of the songs
she has to evolve the ability to sing is
something that causes or keeps the males
moving forward we need one other which
is to turn do we need the females to say
turn left and turn right
no especially it's a toid so if they
just turn One Direction eventually
they'll around uh yeah but it's a very
big
toroid it's massive right 40,000 so if a
female sings to a male and that male
leaves her signaling territory it's
unlikely that that male is going to come
back around anytime soon there's 40,000
cells on this
toroid absolutely I I had a great uncle
who came from the old country years ago
he learned to drive uh when he was
middle-aged um I grew up in a big city
he learned to drive in a big city was
terrified I remember as a kid driving
the car with him this was not a fun
experience he came up with a great
strategy which is just never turn left
everywhere he went everywhere we drove
in the car in a grid like a huge big
city you can in theory get anywhere you
want to go by making a right and in the
Western Hemisphere driving ditions are
turning right is less scary than turning
left took us forever to get certain
places but I always thought it was kind
of crazy as a kid and then 30 years
later I learned about this experiment I
thought maybe not so crazy after all the
females and males can get away with
evolving a language in which there are
just two words go forward and turn X it
doesn't matter whether X evolves to be
left or right if a man enters this
territory and the female Only Knows to
sing the song Turn left how should she
use the two songs that she has a male is
coming in from her Northwest traveling
East and hits this
cell what is she say or what does she
saying uh the male is facing this way so
left male's facing north she sings left
again the male is facing west she sings
left a third time now the male is facing
self and now she sings go forward go
forward right in theory you can get away
with two symbols in this language how
does that compare do you think to uh
females evolving the ability to sing
three different songs go straight turn
left turn right is there an advantage an
evolutionary advantage to these two
languages I would expect the simplified
one would evolve faster but the average
number of moves would be slightly higher
because there's a couple extra
instructions that need to be received
before they can reach the female
absolutely just turn right directly
that's it the left forward language
probably evolves quicker because there's
fewer things that the fem there's only
two things the females learn need to
evolve the ability to emit and there's
only two things that the males need to
evolve to interpret correctly but it's
an inefficient language because in the
example we just looked at the male and
the female waste two time steps in which
it's guaranteed that they are not going
to going to mate
yeah wouldn't it be kind of less likely
if if we're starting with like random
we're starting with like random
probability of of each thing wouldn't it
be less likely to land on three lefts in
a row than it would be to like I I just
I feel like like saying that it's that
it would arrive at the solution faster
like the ability to turn right is
actually pretty unlikely though got it
possibly it might actually be harder for
the females to evolve that because
there's a greater number of conditions
she's got to keep uh right in order for
the mating event to happen same thing
with the male right so maybe yes maybe
no a lot of the research questions that
arise from this experiment which we're
discussing it's not so obvious yeah
which
makes from my perspective makes makes
this evolution of language interesting
evolution of communication interesting
very very simple setup but a lot of Rich
Dynamics can start to occur here
okay okay all right uh we just talked
about this I think but let's just go
through it here we've got a female down
here again I apologize on the very small
font here there's a male out down here
outside of
her uh uh visual range she cannot see
this male she is singing
0000 here in panel a at the next time
step panel B the male as males tend to
do in this world moves forward and
enters her visual range she sees the
male and switches from singing 0000 to
singing 1 01
in panel C it seems like the male is
ignoring that signal the male continues
doing what he was doing before which is
moving straight in a Northerly
Direction in panel D the female suddenly
switches from singing 101 to singing
001 and the male's Behavior immediately
changes the male heard and interpreted
that signal as turn right and the female
in panel a goes back to singing
101 what's going to happen at the next
time step which is not shown in this
figure the male is going to move
straight because we know that this male
moves straight when he hears
one1 okay a successful mating event
here's the example we just saw we just
talked about a minute ago malea uh
entering from the Northwest from the
female's Northwest perspective traveling
East
the female is emitting 1 1 011 1 01
one1 and the male turns left she keeps
singing
one1 and the male keeps turning left
turns left again when she when it when
the male turns left for this third time
she changes back to 011 which the male
interprets as go
forward okay all right so we have seen
now that at least when the females can
sing eight different songs the evolution
of communication can occur but it's now
occurred to us that there are different
possible languages that can evolve under
these conditions so the second
experiment we're going to look at now is
something you mentioned a few minutes
back what happens if we restrict the
communication channel of the female so
that she can only emit four possible
songs and the m s can hear those four
possible songs so we're going to rewind
the evolutionary tape we're going to go
back to
16,000 random agents they all have
random neural networks we're restricting
the output layer of the female and we're
restricting the input layer of the mail
and we leave everything else the same
and start it
up okay this is what things look like at
the very first time step in the
simulation takes a little bit to wrap
your mind around what's going on here
you'll notice uh you'll notice all in
all of these little Bunches of numbers
here there's a number to the left of the
colon and a number to the right of the
colon let's have a look at the number
that's to the right of the colon there
are four digits these four digits
correspond to the four possible songs
that the females can emit
uh in this case it turn again the males
have four possible uh actions so it
turns out that there were a few males
that when they heard whenever they heard
the first of the four songs whenever
they heard the song 0000 the males did
zero which is stay
still the second digit when males heard
this second song song 01 the males did
zero also which is go forward and some
of these males when they heard the third
song they did one which is go forward
and some of these males when they heard
the whenever they heard the fourth song
they did three which is turn
right there were four males the number
to the left of this colon among all 800
males there were four of them that did
this so each grouping of numbers here is
representing a particular subset of
males that and the number to the right
of the colon tells you exactly what
those males did under all four
conditions make sense everybody see how
to read this okay so let's just check
our intuition let's jump at random to
another one let's have a look at this
one here so in this first time step
there were 11 males that did this
distribution of things these things when
they heard those four female songs there
were uh six males that Stood Still
whenever they heard the first of the
three songs and went forward when they
heard the fourth
song again I apologize for the small
font but if you scan your eyes over all
the numbers to the left of the colons
you'll notice that across this ENT
higher table there's a more or less
uniform distribution of things that
males do in response to female
songs everybody see
that okay all
right here's what things look like after
8,000 time steps what's
happening again this is only sh us
changes in behaviors among the males
doesn't really tell us anything about
changes among the behaviors of the
females um it seems like there are some
competing conventions competing
conventions okay how are there competing
conventions here there are competing
conventions here what are they on the
right there are a bunch of like I you
can not necessarily space but you can
see like there are kind of similarities
between some of them there's
similarities at this point at the
beginning there's no male tribes right
all males are doing all the different
things you could possibly imagine the
one thing that should obviously jump out
to you 8,000 times steps later is the
male male Behavior tends to be much more
uniform the ways in which males respond
to female
songs has shrunk
I've highlighted the largest grouping
here what's going on among this tribe of
547 males looks like they just always
move forward except for Oneal just turn
right exactly so you'll notice to the
right of the colon here there are three
ones so for three of the four songs the
males go forward and for the second
female song these particular males only
turn right these males like my great
uncle they never turn
left also none none of the big ones I
guess the exception of 7 the 74 to the
right of it like the 323 and a lot of
the 7s only have two most of them aren't
using all three some of them are using
two or using two of the four motor
Primitives that are available to the
males some are using three some are are
using two or responding to two out of
the four female songs and some are
responding to three out of the four
female songs where are the males that
ignore female songs
altogether are they on
here what would the four digits to the
right of the colon look like for the
group of males that ignore what females
sing 1111 1111 does anyone see one 111
on
here where is
it four above ah here we go here we go
thank you very much right so these males
no matter which of the four songs they
hear they always go forward there's 70
of
them among these two groups among these
70 males and these 547 males who do you
think's got a sunnier future
it's already it's already starting to
become obvious right these
males okay so we keep going all right
let's fast forward through evolutionary
time here's the state of play after the
same simulation 10,000 time steps later
there is now a growing group up here I'm
going to flip back and forth between
8,000 time steps
10,000 time steps 8,000 10,000 8,000
10,000 keep an eye out for the
1113 what's
happening they've evolved kind of
similarly to 6
except
s we've got a competing conventions
thing going on there's this growing
number of groups of males that uh change
what they do based on the fourth song
and there is a very large group of males
that's been around for a while now that
changes what they do or at least they
suppress their default Behavior which is
to go forward when they hear the second
song this is a little off but is this
like process of mapping the songs to
like a is that
grounding is that grounding great Point
yeah what do you think is this a version
of grounding from the M's perspective is
this an example of grounding the symbols
of language 00 0 01 one 0 and one0 in
the soil of sensor motor experience
I mean the language is their sensor
experience all they can do is all they
can do is hear and act based on what
they hear they can't help but ground the
symbols in sensor motor experience
because for the males and actually also
for the females it's a matter of life
and death yes absolutely if you were to
ask one of these males what 01 means the
male is not going to say well I 01 tends
to come before one one and one1 whenever
I encounter a female that's what chat
GPT in the non-embodied AI models do
they'll tell you what a symbol means by
telling you that that symbol tends to
come after a bunch of other symbols it's
not grounded in the soil of sensor motor
experience if you were to be able to ask
a male what 01 means the male would tell
you it causes me to want to turn left
and when I
uh when I go with what feels right I
tend to produce
Offspring yes it it's definitely
grounded in sensor motor experience
great
observation okay so again we're looking
at only what the males do but we should
be able to infer or you should be able
to infer from this that the fact that
there are so many of these males around
must mean there's an evolutionary
advantage to this behavior and also an
evolutionary advantage to this Behavior
Behavior therefore there must be two
groups of females one group knows how to
attract and mate with the 1311 males and
another group of females that knows how
to attract and mate with the
1113 males everybody see
that okay is this it we now see not just
the evolution of communication we see
the evolution of two different languages
simultaneously inside the same evolving
population there are no mountain ranges
on the toroid it's not that these two
groups are physically separated they're
moving and mixing all the time they just
don't literally speak the same
language evolutionary pressure is
continuing to act on the on the males
and females there is exerting
evolutionary pressure
is there anything else that the males
and females or The Descendant the male
and female descendants of these males
and females might evolve to
do so I see one
of also the
ability okay one itic
this one there there were 74 members of
this male tribe now there's only 42
another auspicious number so normally
I'd say that like the next step would be
to evolve the ability to turn the other
direction but clearly that doesn't seem
to be something that evolution is
pushing forward not at this point in
time yep good
observation this seems this group seems
promising the males turn right in
response to signal 2 and left in
response to Signal 4 and we know that
there are two groups of
females that are emitting songs two and
four because that seems to be working
for these males and song number four
tends to be working for this group of
males if you were a male
descendant in this population at this
time from your perspective as a male
what might you want to do might want a
response if you're if you're a female if
you're a female descendant in this
population at this
time what do you want to be
doing you're a female among females some
of whom know to S to emit signal to
under certain conditions and another
separate group of females that know how
to emit song four under a different set
of
conditions what evolutionary pressure is
now starting to build on the female
population the ability to do both the
ability to do both at this point in time
there is evolutionary
pressure uh there there are two po
subpopulations that have evolved in this
larger population they're both monol
linguists the males and females in both
group groups speak the same
language let's see what happens okay
10,000
12,000 at 12,000 we've got 1313 males
somebody mentioned 1313 males they seem
to be responding correctly to both
female groups how do we know that we
know that because these males turn right
in response to song two
and this big male tribe tells us down
here indirectly that there are male
females that know uh how to sing song
two to attract males that turn right
when they hear song two there's
potential here for these males and these
males also quote unquote know that there
is another group of females that know
how to turn how to when to sing song for
to attract males that turn right when
they hear that song
so this is 12,000 time steps have a look
at this particular tribe
here 20 members of this tribe at time
10,000
128 members of this tribe at 12,000
what's happening to the other two
monolingual
tribes I'm going to advance this slide a
couple more slides what do you think's
going to happen who are you rooting for
here they're probably like L numbers
as here's
14,000
16,000
20,000
30,000
40,000 if you're not on du lingo I would
highly recommend that you do
it's one take away from this lesson
today is is it pretty rare that when
when you're training that it like even
like that it actually converges on one
result well would happen if you rewound
The evolutionary tape and you ran this
experiment all over again this
particular experiment in which there's
only four possible female sigal what do
you think would happen would the entire
population evolve on
multilingual uh receivers and
multilingual emitters this is another
item here right we know that the males
have converged what's going on with the
females there's one uniform population
of multilingual females all 1600 females
are multilingual there is no longer a
population of this many monol linguists
and this many other monol linguists how
do we know that that's the case
we're inferring that from this
data biling males respond the bilingual
the bilingual males can respond
correctly they can they can mate with
monolingual females of one group and
monolingual females of the other group
and they can mate with any bilingual
females if there are any
that's clearly an advantage for the
males is there an advantage for the
females to evolve to be
bilingual
why because until the male population
does converge it's going to
increase absolutely at this point in
which every single male is bilingual now
among the female population it doesn't
matter you can only emit song one and
two or only a mid song one and four and
you'll with equal probability attract
these particular
males but as these during this
evolutionary period you're more likely
as a female to be able to attract these
males or these males or these males if
you speak two languages a monolingual
female during this evolutionary period
can only capture males from one of these
three groups not from all three groups
there is selection pressure acting on
both the female and male populations at
this point not just to evolve
communication but to evolve to be
bilingual in this
case okay we've got one minute left in
class back to your question what do you
think would happen if we Rew rewound The
evolutionary tape and ran it Forward
again would we get the evolution of
monol linguists followed by the
evolution of bil
linguists I would guess probably yes for
the fact that it's the only way you go
you would end up converging on monist is
there was just like one really dominant
language
possibly possibly but not
quite look at what the males are
doing these incredibly fit males and
this is the only thing the males ever
do is is this the optimal solution for
the males and the
females I see some of you shaking your
heads no why not how do you know this
isn't optimal they can only turn One
Direction they can only turn One
Direction my great uncle strikes again
good solution but not an optimal
solution a lot of amazing things going
on here but evolution is a satisficer
not an Optimizer Evolution has converged
on a pretty good Sol ution but it's
inefficient it would be great if males
actually were able to turn left and
right in response to a lot of different
signals yeah is our language the most
efficient language there is could I have
communicated everything I communicated
to you this morning in less than 75
minutes probably yes I don't know how
but probably yes is there any
evolutionary the number
step is there any evolutionary pressure
in this experiment absolutely there is
evolutionary pressure to reduce the
number of time steps between mating
events absolutely there's very strong
evolutionary pressure in this experiment
evolution of language and language
obviously a fascinating topic we could
teach a whole class on this we're going
to put a pin in this for now uh you have
a quiz due tonight you're working on
your final project have a good rest of
your week see you on Tuesday